## C++ sorting algorithms
Using two different sorting algorithms and two different paralellization strategies(fork/join and locks), this program sorts a (specified) *.txt*  file of unique integers and outputs the sorted list to a different (specified) *.txt* file. The input *.txt* file will be an unsorted data structure [Standard Template Library (STL) vector]. This is to emulate the performance of the UNIX `sort-n` command.

#### Sorting Algorithms:
  1. **Quicksort** - picks element as pivot and partition exchanging
  2. **Mergesort** - divides into two halfs, then merges sorted halfs
  3. **Bucketsort** - sorts array into different bins, sorts the bins, then rejoins

#### Added functionality:
  1. Fork/join parellelism - implementation of fork, join, and barriers
  2. Locks - synchronization mechanism for enforcing limits of resource access; also known as mutex (mutual exlcusion). Used in conjunction with multiple threading a process.

---
## Code Organization

### 📁 Files
  1. `main.cpp` - primary C++ file for program execution
  2. `Makefile` - create executable objects
  3. `fj_mergesort.h` - header file for merge sort using fork/join
  4. `lk_bucketsort.h` - header file for bucket sort using locks
  5. `arg_parser.h` - error handling and parsing for program's input options
  6. `README.pdf` - write-up for project

### 💾 Additional files
  1. `randomNumberGen.cpp`- creates a text file with a specified number of random numbers from [ 1 - number size ]. Default number is 10,000 unless specified when ran (as second argument).
  2. `pthread_add.h` - threading if compiling on macOS (will still run as normal for linux systems)
  3. `quicksort.h` - header file for normal implementation of quick sorting
  4. `test.c` - C file for testing thread creation
  5. `Makefile.test` - Makefile for test.c

### Compiling
  Note: If zipped, first unzip file before proceeding.
  1. From root directory, run `make` from the terminal. This will generate a program called *mysort*
  2. Additionally, if wanting to create a text file (*source.txt*) of randomly generated numbers (repeatable), run `make numGen` from the terminal. Then, `./numGen <amount of numbers to generate>`. If a second argument isn't passed in (`./numGen`), the program will generate a 10,000 random numbers (between 1 and 30,000) by default.
  3. Next, follow execution syntax below for parallel algoritm sorting.
  4. `Make clean` will remove all file generated by `make`, to include `make numGen`.

### Execution
#### Program option/input parameters  
`mysort [--name]`
**OR**
`mysort [source.txt] [-o out.txt] [-t NUM THREADS] [--alg=<fjmerge,fjquick,lkbucket>]`
  1. `mysort --name`: prints name to console.
  2. `source.txt`: unsorted txt file of numbers, with each number on a new line
  3. `-o out.txt`: sorted txt file of numebrs, in which the program outputs/writes to
  4. `-t NUM_THREADS`: specify how many threads to use during execution (including master thread)
  5. `--alg=<fjmerge, lkbucket>`: specify which algorithm to use.
      - fjmerge: merge sort using fork/join  
      - lkbucket: bucket sort using locks  
  - **Additional outputs**: time of execution in nanoseconds

#### 🐜 Surviving Bugs
  - Input/output files are loaded/saved as is. Does not check for txt file types.
  - Numbers within input txt file must be integers (not checked) for the program to work.
